**Activity: Understanding and Working with Data Visualizations **

*Adapted from Visualization Best Practices, Gengo, 2017 & Visualization,
the Medicine for Big Data, East Africa Business Daily 2017)*

**Objectives: **

-   Understand the importance of visualized data and why visualization
    matters.

-   Learn how to interpret and use visualized data.

-   Learn how to be consumers of data visualizations, who can use the
    data in the visualization, and how the information found in the data
    could be applied to answer different questions.

[]{#_gjdgxs .anchor}**Total anticipated time: 35 minutes **

**Materials Needed: **

-   Data visualization print-outs

-   Datasets printed out for participants

-   Data visualizations

**Introduction: (Use the following information to introduce and explain
the activity to the class) **

Remind the class that data visualization is a way to help people
understand the significance of data by placing them in a visual context.
Patterns, trends, and correlations that might go undetected in
text-based data can be exposed and recognized easier with data
visualization.

Pass around this image, or show it on the screen

![](media/image1.png){width="4.0448982939632545in"
height="3.4615496500437444in"}![](media/image2.png){width="4.3in"
height="0.91875in"}

Only allow each person to look at the information for 30 seconds. What
information is provided? Is it qualitative or quantitative? What does
this information show? Who can use it/what is it for? The participants
may not have complete answers to this.

Now show the class the same dataset, but visualized:

![](media/image3.png){width="4.3in" height="3.1131944444444444in"}

Allow the class 30 seconds once more. Now, have them answer: What
information is provided? Is it qualitative or quantitative? What does
this information show? Who can use it/what is it for? The participants
may not have complete answers to this.

Because of the way the human brain processes information, using charts
or graphs to visualize large amounts of complex data is easier than
looking at datasets or reports. Data visualization is a quick, easy way
to convey concepts in a universal manner.

Visualizing data allows us to help the person using your data easily
understand your results and quick pull out information that is relevant
to them.

Now ask the class how they would visualize these data for different
stakeholders. How would they visualize them for those working in the
employment bureau? What about that work at an NGO? How would the public
want to view these data?

In this activity, the participants will be broken into groups of 2-3.
They will each be given a data visualization. Working together, they
should answer the following questions:

-   What are the data that were used to make this visualization? It is
    not provided, so think critically about what information was used to
    make the chart.

-   Who is the intended audience, or audiences, that could use it?

-   How could they frame these data to a different stakeholder? For
    example, if their answer to the above question was the government,
    how should these data be visualized for the public?

-   What problem are these data visualizations trying to show?

-   What information can you gather from the visualization?

-   What conclusions could you make from the visualization?

-   Using the conclusions you made, what are additional questions that
    you could as about the information provided in the data
    visualization?

-   What kinds of decisions could be made from them?

Once the class is finished, have each group present their findings to
class. When the presentations are over, debrief with the participants.
You might ask the following questions:

-   Did you like one visualization more than the other?

-   How can you use data visualizations to make insightful conclusions?

-   How can you use these conclusions to make decisions?

-   How can these decisions improving programming within communities or
    organizations?

-   What should you consider when visualized data for the public, the
    government, or an NGO?

NOTE:

For more advanced classes, use the following questions for participants
to answer in their presentations:

What other data could be provided to make this more meaningful?

-   Different percentages? Total populations? Other...

    -   Why do we want to communicate this message or outcome through
        these data?

-   Is there anything misleading or easily misinterpreted with the
    specific visualization?

-   What other information is necessary for the context?

-   What assumptions are made about the graph?
