##Activity 1.1: Defining a Problem within an organization

*Adapted from UNDP, A Guide to Data Innovation for Development (2016)*

**Objectives:**

-   Learn how to address a challenge at your organization by defining a
    problem that you can use data to solve.

-   Understand how to think through the problem, what types of data may
    already be available to you, and how you can collect new data to
    address that problem.

-   Think critically about how to ask the right questions, collect the
    right data, and how that data can inform the decisions you make at
    your organization.

**Total anticipated time:** 35 mins

**Materials Needed:**

-   Problem definition tool from UNDP, A Guide to Data Innovation for
    Development (2016)

-   Pencils

**Introduction: (Use the following information to introduce and explain
the activity to the class)**

A key piece of using data for decision making is learning how to specify
how you would like to use your data as evidence, and what questions you
would like to ask your data in order to generate that evidence. This
begins with being able to define a problem or need in your organization.

Defining a problem or challenge that you wish to solve using data can
help you space time and resources while you maximize your project
returns. With a clearly defined problem, you can build your own capacity
to collect only the data that you need to answer your own questions.

The Problem definition tool can help identify the key challenge you are
trying to address, and to being thinking about what data already exist
on the issue. The tool will push you to think specifically about how
better measurement or more complete information can help solve the
problem. What new decisions will be made? What responses can be faster?

As you complete the problem definition tool, you should ask yourself
what data you already have surrounding the problem. You should also
think how you can find any existing data about previous projects in the
same problem area or around similar data sources. This can spark new
ideas for potential data sources for a solution.

Before having the participants begin, ask them to think critically about
an issue they have in their organization. Then, have the participants
work through the problem definition tool provided on the next page (20
mins).

**Participant Guide: Problem Definition Tool**

*Directions: Use this guide to help you think through a key issue you
are trying to address, the factors that contribute to that issue, the
people it affects, existing data surrounding the issue, potential
sources of new data, and how to use those data to make a decision.*

1.  What is the key issue you want to address and why is it important?

2.  What is contributing to the problem? (Guiding questions: What issues
    surround the problem that keep it from being solved? What is the
    environment of the problem?)

3.  Who are the people that are directly affected by the problem?

4.  Who, if anyone, is currently working on the problem?

5.  What data, relevant to this problem, exist already?

6.  How up-to-date are these data? What do they focus on? (Demographics?
    Geography?)

7.  How can you use those data to solve your problem?

**Presentations and Debrief (15 minutes)**

Ask the participants who would like to volunteer and share what they
wrote on their problem definition tool. After each presentation, ask
some guiding discussion questions for the participants, such as: What
was the problem the participant were trying to solve? How did they use
new forms of data collection to solve it? How can they now use those
data for decision making?
