**Activity 4.2: Making Meaning with your Data**

**Objectives:**

-   Understand the importance of cleaning and coding data for analysis

-   Learn how to identify when data need to be cleaned or coded

-   Learn how to effectively code your data for analysis

**Total anticipated time: 35 mins**

**Materials Needed:**

*If participants have computers:*

-   Laptops

-   Excel

-   Excel file for cleaning and coding

-   Methods sheet for coding

*If participants do not have computers:*

-   Printout of dataset worksheet

-   Directions

-   Codesheet

-   Pens or pencils

**Introduction: (Use the following information to introduce and explain
the activity to the class)**

Remind the class that in order for data to be used effectively for
analysis and decision making, the data need to be properly cleaned and
often recoded. Cleaning the data ensures that the data are standardized
and readable by the software. This often entails checking for
standardization between different returns, spelling errors, and
capitalization. Coding data allows us to condense returns into
categories or patterns that are more beneficial to decision making
analysis or for communicating to an intended audience. Coding is
particularly useful when data collection methods are open ended (i.e.
demographic data questionnaires for occupation or education). Cleaning
and coding are particularly important when visualizing data.

*Example of the Importance of Cleaning*

Pass around this image, or show it on the screen:

![C:\\Users\\erinmc91\\Desktop\\excel example state or region
uncoded.jpg](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.8020833333333335in"
height="5.854292432195975in"}

Ask the participants to look at the column labeled “State or Region” and
ask them if they can identify any problems. Only allow up to one minute.
If the participants do not answer or do not answer correctly, point out
that some returns are labeled “yangon” or “Mon” while others are labeled
“Yangon Region” or “Mon State.” Show them the same dataset, but
visualized, to show what happens when you visualize data that are not
cleaned:

![C:\\Users\\erinmc91\\Desktop\\state region visual not
recoded.jpg](media/image2.jpeg){width="6.489583333333333in"
height="2.3333333333333335in"}

Allow the class 30 seconds to answer this question: Why is this visual
problematic? They should answer that there are separate columns in the
visual for the same state or region because the labels are different in
the dataset.

Now show the class the dataset after it has been recoded:

*This dataset is taken from the working data files of the demographic
data of elected MPs in Myanmar’s State and Region Parliaments. This was
part of a project between the Enlightened Myanmar Research Foundation,
the University of Washington, and Tableau Foundation in 2016.*

![C:\\Users\\erinmc91\\Desktop\\excel exp state and region
recoded.jpg](media/image3.jpeg){width="5.166666666666667in"
height="5.767018810148731in"}

Explain to them that the new column is usually added at the end of the
original database. The spelling and capitalization is the same for each
return and the names for returns are standardized (for example, returns
for Magway are recoded as Magway Region and returns for shan are
returned as Shan State).

Show them the same dataset visualized for the cleaned data:

![C:\\Users\\erinmc91\\Desktop\\State\_Region\_recoded\_visual.jpg](media/image4.jpeg){width="6.489583333333333in"
height="1.625in"}

*Example of the Importance of Recoding*

Pass around the image, or show it on the screen:

![C:\\Users\\erinmc91\\Desktop\\education\_spreadsheet\_snapshot\_curriculum
(1).jpg](media/image5.jpeg){width="5.197916666666667in"
height="6.447916666666667in"}

Ask the participants to look at Column A (Education). Inform them that
these data were compiled from an open-ended response to “education” on a
form for parliamentary candidates in Myanmar. Because individuals were
not provided with a closed list of options to choose from, we can see
that there are many different responses.

Show the participants this visual, which is the data in column A in
visual format:

![C:\\Users\\erinmc91\\Desktop\\education\_notcoded\_visual.jpg](media/image6.jpeg){width="6.5in"
height="4.833333333333333in"}

Explain to the participants that this does not easily tell us the
educational attainment of the individuals. When there are many
categories with few returns (in this case, one or two returns), the data
should be recoded.

Return to the previous image of the dataset. Ask participants to look at
Column C, which shows the data recoded into the highest level of
education completed. In recoding the data, all degrees considered to be
bachelor’s degrees were recoded as “Bachelor.” Master’s degrees were
recoded as “Master.” Individuals who began university study but did not
or have not yet completed a bachelor’s degree were recoded into the
category “Some University.” High School completion and middle school
completion were recoded into “B.E.H.S. and B.E.M.S. respectively.
M.B.B.S., medical bachelor’s degree, remained as it was in the original
dataset.

Now show the participants the recoded education data in visual format:

![C:\\Users\\erinmc91\\Desktop\\Education\_recode\_visual\_curriculum.jpg](media/image7.jpeg){width="5.010416666666667in"
height="6.46875in"}

Ask them which visual provides more information about the educational
attainment of the individuals? They should answer the second visual
(recoded data).

Now break the participants into groups of 2-3. They will be given a
dataset with data that need to be cleaned and coded. If participants are
using computer, provide them with the excel file. If they are not using
computers, provide them the paper copy of the excel file included in
this activity. They will also be provided with a directions sheet and a
codesheet that provides them with the categories and methods to be used
to recode the data for each indicator. If the class is more advanced,
only provide them with the directions and make them create their own
codesheet for recoding the data. Working together, they should do the
following:

-   Clean the “State or Region” data so that they are standardized,
    spelled correctly, and capitalized the same.

-   Recode the “Occupation” data:

    -   Recode the occupations by sector. The sectors that participants
        should use are provided on the codesheet. For example, farmers
        and individuals who work with livestock should be recoded as
        “Agriculture.” Teachers and headmasters should be recoded as
        “Education.”

-   Recode the “Education” data two different ways:

    -   First, by completed education (middle school, high school, some
        university, bachelor, master, Ph.D.). For example, B.A., B.Sc.,
        L.L.B., and B.Ed. will all be classified as “bachelor”

    -   Second, by the highest education completed using four categories
        represented by numeric returns (0 = below bachelor; 1 =
        bachelor; 2 = above bachelor’s.) For example, B.E.M.S. and
        B.E.H.S. will be coded with a 0 because these education levels
        are below bachelor’s degrees. A Master’s degree and a Ph.D. will
        be coded with a 2, since they are degrees higher than a
        Bachelor’s degree.

Walk around the room and provide participants with help as needed. Refer
to the cheat sheet if needed.

At the end, provide each group with a cheat sheet, or put it up on the
screen and allow them a maximum of 5 minutes to check their responses.
Ask participants if they are confused or have any questions.

Last, ask the participants these questions:

-   What was challenging?

-   Why is cleaning and coding the data important?

![C:\\Users\\erinmc91\\Desktop\\making meaning student excel worksheet
(1).jpg](media/image8.jpeg){width="8.864583333333334in"
height="6.499990157480315in"}

***DIRECTIONS:***

1.  Please clean the data returns for “State or Region” (column B). You
    should provide the new cleaned data in Column E,
    “StateRegion\_Recode.”

    a.  You should include the label “State” or “Region” following the
        name of the administrative territory. For example, Yangon Region
        or Shan State

    b.  There should be a space between the territory name and the label
        State or Region and both should be capitalized. For example,
        Magway Region. Do not write magway region or MagwayRegion.

    c.  See “Coding State and Region Data” for the comprehensive list of
        labels you should use for the recoded column

2.  Please recode the Occupation data. The original occupation returns
    are provided in column C.

    a.  Recode these by sector in Column F. A sector is a distinct part
        of society. In a state, key sectors are usually represented by a
        ministry or department. For a comprehensive list of sectors to
        use for recoding and to decide which occupations should be
        recoded into the given sectors, refer to “Coding Occupation
        Sectors.”

    b.  Please make sure that all recoded returns (Column F) are
        capitalized and spelled correctly.

3.  Please recode the Education data. The original education data are
    provided in Column D.

    a.  First, recode these data by education completed in Column G. The
        following categories should be used: Middle School, High School,
        Some University, Bachelor, Master, Ph.D. “Some University”
        refers to individuals who started a university degree but have
        not completed a bachelor’s degree. Please refer to “Coding
        Education Completed” to help you identify which returns should
        be recoded under the new categories.

    b.  Second, recode the data numerically to represent the highest
        educational level obtained in Column H. This return is intended
        to show who has not obtained a university degree (below
        bachelor), who has obtained a bachelor’s degree, and who has
        obtained a higher degree (master’s degree or Ph.D.). Please use
        the following numbers: 0 = below bachelor’s degree; 1 =
        bachelor’s degree; 2 = above bachelor’s degree. Please refer to
        “Numeric Coding for Highest Education Obtained” for a detailed
        explanation of which returns should be recoded with each number.

***CODESHEET***

*Coding State and Region Data*

Please use the following categories:

  **States**     **Regions**
  -------------- ----------------
  Kachin State   Bago Region
  Kayin State    Magway Region
  Mon State      Sagaing Region
  Shan State     Yangon Region

*Coding Occupation Sectors*

Please use the following sectors:

  **Sector**        **Returns included**
  ----------------- ---------------------------------------------------
  Agriculture       Farmer, Rice mill owner, Gardener, Livestock
  Education         Teacher, Headmaster, Professor
  Government        Minister
  Health            Clinic practitioner, Doctor, Nurse
  Law               Advocate
  Military          Military personnel, Major, Deputy general manager
  Not Applicable    Unknown, Dependent
  Political Party   Political party chair, MP
  Sales             Trader, Shop owner, Fishery business owner
  Services          Hotel owner

*Coding Education Completed*

Please use the following categories to recode the education returns:

  **Education Recode Category**   **Returns included**
  ------------------------------- ---------------------------------------
  B.E.M.S.                        B.E.M.S.
  B.E.H.S.                        B.E.H.S.
  Some University                 B.A. (first year), B.A. (second year)
  Bachelor                        B.A., B.Sc., B.Ed., L.L.B., M.B.B.S.
  Master                          M.A., M.Sc., L.L.M.
  Ph.D.                           Ph.D.

*Numeric Coding for Highest Education Obtained*

Please use the following numbers to represent the highest education
level obtained:

  **Numeric Recode Highest Education**   **Education Recode Categories included**
  -------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------
  0                                      B.E.M.S., B.E.H.S., Some University
  1                                      Bachelor
  2                                      Master, Ph.D.

***Teacher Cheat Sheet:***

![C:\\Users\\erinmc91\\Desktop\\making meaning worksheet teacher cheat
sheet (1).jpg](media/image9.jpeg){width="8.78125in"
height="6.291200787401575in"}
