**Activity 3.1: Data Collection Telephone**

**Objectives:**

-   Apply the data lifecycle to an in classroom activity

-   Understand each phase of the cycle and questions to consider
    > throughout the cycle

-   Think creatively and critically about how to apply the data
    > lifecycle to different

**Total anticipated time: 25 mins**

**Materials Needed:**

-   Paper

-   Pencils

-   Data management plan template (located in the Appendix of this
    > document)

-   Timer or stopwatch

**Introduction: (Use the following information to introduce and explain
the activity to the class)**

This activity will help participants apply the data lifecycle by having
them think through various stages of the lifecycle from unique, real
world examples from other participants. Explain to the participants that
this game builds upon a popular children’s game in the United States
called “telephone”. In this game, a phrase is whispered from individual
to the next, and the individual is not allowed to ask for the phrase to
be repeated. Then, the individual whispers this word to another
individual, and so on and so forth until the phrase is passed on to all
the individuals participating in the game.

If need be, feel free to play the game as an example to provide context
for the students. Example phrases to use in the game could be anything,
such as “walking in a winter wonderland” or “dogs dig holes for big
bones”. Keep in mind the phrase that you use should be short and simple
in order to not make the game unnecessarily complicated. Start the chain
yourself, and then have the participants pass the phrase along by
whispering into each other’s ear one by one, until the phrase gets to
the last participant. Have the last participant stand up and say the
phrase. If you are lucky, the phrase has been kept intact throughout the
chain. However, often the phrase will have been muddled and may turn
into something completely different.

Introduce to the participants that the class is going to do a similar
activity, but revolving around the data lifecycle. Break the class up
into groups of 2-3. Pass out the data management plan template to each
group. Once each group has one, explain that each team should begin by
writing a question they want to answer with data in the provided space
on the sheet. Then once everyone is finished, groups will pass their
data management plan to a different group. Then, that group will have
four minutes to think through one phase of the data lifecycle for the
problem or question from the other team. Then, once time is up, the
paper is passed to another team, until the problem has gone through the
phases of collection, analysis, and sharing.

Once the phases are complete, return each group’s original data
collection plan to the appropriate owners. Have the class look at the
responses before leadings a discussion about what happened in the
activity. Some guiding questions include: What was planned for data
collection, analysis, and sharing? it different from what you would have
done yourself? How has the telephone game enhanced your understanding of
the importance of collaboration?

**Student Guide: Data Management Plan**

**Directions**: Use this data management plan to write your own problem
or issue that you would like to use data to address at your own
organization. Leave the boxes for data collection, analysis, and sharing
blank as these will be filled out by your peers during the “telephone”
game.

1\. What problem would you like to address using data?

2\. How should this group collect their data? What sources of data could
they use?

3\. How should tis group plan to analyze their data? Are there any
changes that they should make to the data that was suggested to be
collected by the previous group before beginning analysis?

4\. How should this group plan to share their data? What groups should
they share their data with? Are there any challenges that they might
face when they share their data? How can they overcome these challenges?

[]{#_gjdgxs .anchor}
