**Activity 2.2: Learning to Share Resources**

*Data sources were created for the purpose of this activity*

**Objectives:**

-   Learn how to identify when your data alone cannot answer a specific
    research question or problem

-   Learn to identify and collaborate with institutions with relevant
    data

-   Understand why sharing data is important for decision making

**Total anticipated time:** 25 minutes

**Materials Needed:**

-   Research Questions (printed out)

-   Dataset printouts

-   Computer

-   Projector

**Introduction: (Use the following information to introduce and explain
the activity to the class)**

Government and civil society institutions often collect data within a
specific sector. For example, the Department of Education collects data
on student demographics, student enrollment, and school facilities,
whereas a health NGO might collect data on diseases and disabilities.
Often, however, these institutions identify problems or research
questions that require additional data from outside of the specific
sector. For example, the Department of Labor might want to understand if
unemployment is higher and average GDP lower in districts where there
are more immigrants. In this instance, the Department of Labor wants to
access or request information from the Department of Immigration.
Collaboration and cooperation with regards to data between both
government institutions and civil society organizations is important in
ensuring that the data are available for making evidence-based and
credible decisions.

In this activity, put the participants into six groups. Give each group
a dataset and the relevant research question or problem. Ask them to
identify what information they already have in their data to answer the
question and what information they need. Then ask them to find the
respective organization with the relevant data. Ask participants to
answer the following questions:

-   What data do you need to address the problem/answer the question?

-   What data do you have from your organization’s dataset?

-   What information are you missing?

-   How did you identify which organization had data you could use?

-   Which data did you use from the other organization and why?

After the participants have completed the exercise, ask participants to
think about other situations in which they need to share data. Ask them
to think about the data their organization collects or uses and which
organizations they know who collect relevant data that they could
collaborate with in the future. Have participants brainstorm out loud as
a class.

**Instructor: Cut or rip apart the different groups and give each group
one group name and relevant question/problem**

*Cell phone company*

*You have a dataset that shows the number of cell towers four companies
have built in each district of the five states. You are a new company
and you want to build new cell towers, particularly in rural areas;
however, you need to make sure that enough of the population has access
to electricity. In the rural districts where there are the fewest cell
towers, what percentage of the population has access to electricity? *

*Health NGO*

*You want a dataset that shows the number of deaths for each illness or
disease in each district of the five states. Does a higher percentage of
the district population die from illnesses and diseases where there is
limited access to hospitals? *

*Department of Energy*

*You have a dataset that shows individuals’ main energy source at home.
You want to research how access to electricity or readily available
light might affect school completion rates, particularly between primary
and middle school. Is the middle school dropout rate higher in districts
where the majority of the population relies of kerosene, candles, and
solar energy?*

*Department of Health*

*You have a dataset that shows the number of hospitals and medical
clinics in each district. You want to know which districts are most
affected by low access to electricity, which would affect hospital and
clinic operations. How many hospitals and how many clinics are located
in districts where less than 20% of the population has access to
electricity?*

*Department of Labor*

*You have a dataset that shows the employment status for individuals
over the age of 25 in each district. Often, access to electricity and
consistent sources of power can increase productivity and workplace
operations. You want to research the relationship between higher
unemployment rates and limited access to consistent and modern power
sources. Is the percentage of the unemployed district population higher
in districts where there is limited access to electricity?*

*Department of Education*

*You have a dataset from data collection on education completion in all
the districts of the five states. You want to know if higher educational
completion of the population relates to lower unemployment rates. What
is the average educational attainment of the population in the districts
with the highest unemployment rates?*

[]{#_gjdgxs .anchor}**Department of Education**

![C:\\Users\\Erin\\AppData\\Local\\Microsoft\\Windows\\INetCache\\Content.Word\\2.1
edu excel file.jpg](media/image1.jpg){width="8.239583333333334in"
height="5.830653980752406in"}

**Department of Health**

![](media/image2.jpg){width="5.40625in" height="7.385416666666667in"}

**Cell Phone Company**

![C:\\Users\\Erin\\AppData\\Local\\Microsoft\\Windows\\INetCache\\Content.Word\\2.1
cell tower excel.jpg](media/image3.jpg){width="5.90625in"
height="6.333333333333333in"}

**Department of Labor**

![C:\\Users\\Erin\\AppData\\Local\\Microsoft\\Windows\\INetCache\\Content.Word\\2.1
labor excel file.jpg](media/image4.jpg){width="5.979166666666667in"
height="7.614583333333333in"}

**Health NGO**

![C:\\Users\\Erin\\AppData\\Local\\Microsoft\\Windows\\INetCache\\Content.Word\\2.1
health ngo excel.jpg](media/image5.jpg){width="7.332027559055118in"
height="6.072916666666667in"}

**Department of Energy**

![C:\\Users\\Erin\\AppData\\Local\\Microsoft\\Windows\\INetCache\\Content.Word\\2.1
energy excel file.jpg](media/image6.jpg){width="7.735430883639545in"
height="6.410402449693788in"}
