**Activity 2.1: Revisiting Organizational Critical Incidents **

*Adapted from the Asian Development Bank, “The Critical Incident
Technique”, 2010)*

**Objectives: **

-   Learn how to identify critical incidents at each participant’s
    organizations.

-   Think critically about the incident and how the incident impacted
    their organization.

-   Review how data were collected, analyzed, and used throughout the
    critical incident.

-   Identify new ways to handle this incident in data for decision
    making in the future.

**\
Total anticipated time:** 25 minutes

**Materials Needed: **

-   Paper

-   Pencils

**Introduction: (Use the following information to introduce and explain
the activity to the class) **

Organizations are often challenged to identify and resolve both internal
(staff) and external (program) problems. These are called critical
incidents because they are significant to the people that work at the
organization, the organization’s programming, and the organization’s
mission and vision. Remind the participants that the word critical in
this scenario mean “important”, rather than in the negative sense.
Therefore critical incidents are simply something really important that
happened to an organization and can be called good or bad.

(Asian Development Bank, 2010)

Both positive and negative critical incidents happen to almost every
organization. After they happen, it is important to sit down and think
through them. Why did this incident happen? How did it impact the
organization? How will it affect our ability to continue to serve the
community?

In this activity, put the participants into groups of 2-3. Then, ask
them to think about a critical incident (good or bad) that happened at
each of their organizations that reflected something about their
organization’s data culture. For example, was there an instance where
their organization was asked to create a report using data that weren’t
available to them? Or did their organization have to make a decision
about what types of data to collect and what types of data not to
collect?

[]{#_gjdgxs .anchor}For each incident, have the participants think
through the following questions and write down their answers:

-   What happened?

-   What were the events or circumstances that led to the critical
    incident?

-   What were the outcomes of the critical incident?

-   Did the incident improve a decrease organizational performance?

-   What could be the possible outcomes if behaviors remain unchanged?

-   What could be the possible outcomes if behaviors changed based on
    using lessons learned from that critical incident?

-   How can these lessons learned be used to make decisions to improve
    organizational performance based on data and evidence gathered?

Once the participants have shared their stories, ask for volunteers to
present to the class. After the presentations, debrief with the class
and hold a discussion. How do they think their organization can gain
from critical incidents in the future? What is the importance of data
for decision making in these incidents? How can they teach others in
their organizations about the importance of reviewing these incidents in
order to gain insights about their organizations?
